📖 More documentation on v1.11 migration (#12236)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/book/src/developer/providers/migrations/v1.10-to-v1.11.md

    * [Contract rules for InfraMachine](#contract-rules-for-inframachine)
    * [Contract rules for BootstrapConfig](#contract-rules-for-bootstrapconfig)
    * [Contract rules for ControlPlane](#contract-rules-for-controlplane)
    * [Contract rules for IPAM provider](#contract-rules-for-ipam-provider)
    * [Contract rules for MachinePool](#contract-rules-for-machinepool)
  * [Deprecations](#deprecations)
  * [Removals](#removals)
  * [Suggested changes for providers](#suggested-changes-for-providers)
    * [How to bump to CAPI V1.11 but keep implementing the deprecated v1beta1 contract](#how-to-bump-to-capi-v111-but-keep-implementing-the-deprecated-v1beta1-contract)
    * [How to implement the new v1beta2 contract](#how-to-implement-the-new-v1beta2-contract)
    * [How to bump to CAPI V1.11 but keep using deprecated v1beta1 conditions](#how-to-bump-to-capi-v111-but-keep-using-deprecated-v1beta1-conditions)
    * [How to start using metav1.conditions](#how-to-start-using-metav1conditions)
      * [Stage 1](#stage-1-)
      * [Stage 2](#stage-2)
      * [Stage 3](#stage-3)
<!-- TOC -->

## Go version

- The minimal Go version required to build Cluster API is v1.23.x

> - The Go version used by Cluster API is v1.23.x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Go version used by Cluster API is v1.24.x
```

We already use v1.24.x

## Dependencies

- The Controller Runtime version used by Cluster API is v0.21.x
- The version of the Kubernetes libraries used by Cluster API is v1.33.x

## API Changes

- v1beta1 API version is now deprecated and it will be removed tentatively in August 2026
- v1beta2 API version has been introduced; see following paragraphs for more details
- If you are using the `runtime.cluster.x-k8s.io` API group, please be aware that
  - `ExtensionConfig` v1alpha1 has been deprecated, and it will be removed in a following release.
  - `ExtensionConfig` v1beta2 has created (thus aligning with other Cluster API resources)

>  ### All Kind

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 ### All Kinds
```
or "All CRDs"? (also requires updating the links below)

- The transition to the new K8s aligned conditions using `metav1.Conditions` types and the new condition semantic
  has been completed for all Kinds:
  - `status.conditions` has been replaced with `status.v1beta2.conditions` based on metav1 condition types
  - the old `status.conditions` based on custom cluster API condition types will continue to exist temporarily 
    under `status.deprecated.v1beta1.conditions` for the sake of down conversions and to provide a temporary option
    for users willing to continue using old conditions.

### Cluster

- See changes that applies to [all kind](#all-kind)
- The `spec.topology.class` has been renamed to `spec.topology.classRef.name`
- The `spec.topology.classNamespace` has been renamed to `spec.topology.classRef.namespace`
- The `definitionFrom` field (deprecated since CAPI v1.8) has been removed from
  - `cluster.spec.topology.variables`

>   - `cluster.spec.topology.controlPlane.variables.override`
>   - `cluster.spec.topology.workers[].machineDeployments.variables.override`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `spec.topology.controlPlane.variables.overrides`
  - `spec.topology.workers[].machineDeployments.variables.overrides`
```

Also MachinePool

(dropped the cluster prefix for consistency with other field paths here. I would do the same for other fields below (including machineDeployment.status.phase, ..)

> - Informations about the initial provisioning process are now surfacing under `status.initialization` (see [dataSecretCreated](#cluster-api-contract-changes)).

Author: Dropped most of those links, not sure it helps users mixing up changes in the contract with changes in CRDs

- Support for terminal errors has been dropped (see [dataSecretCreated](#cluster-api-contract-changes)).
  - `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` will continue to exist temporarily under `status.deprecated.v1beta1`.

### MachinePool

- See changes that applies to [all kind](#all-kind)
- Replica counters are now consistent with replica counters from other resources
  - `status.readyReplicas` has now a new semantic based on machine's `Ready` condition
  - `status.availableReplicas` has now a new semantic based on machine's `Available` condition
  - `status.upToDateReplicas` has now a new semantic (and name) based on machine's `UpToDate` condition
  - Temporarily, old replica counters will still be available under the `status.deprecated.v1beta1` struct
- Support for terminal errors has been dropped (see [dataSecretCreated](#cluster-api-contract-changes)).
  - `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` will continue to exist temporarily under `status.deprecated.v1beta1`.
  - The const values for `Failed` phase has been deprecated in the enum type for `machinePool.status.phase` (controllers are not setting this value anymore)

> ### Machine

Reviewer: Is it ok not to write about minReadySeconds?

Reviewer 2: I think we didn't merge any changes related to minReadySeconds yet

Author: Yeah, ideally each PR should document it's own bits, this reduces the chance of missing something

- See changes that applies to [all kind](#all-kind)

> - Informations about the initial provisioning process are now surfacing under `status.initialization` (see [dataSecretCreated](#cluster-api-contract-changes)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Information about the initial provisioning process is now surfacing under `status.initialization` (see [dataSecretCreated](#cluster-api-contract-changes)).
```
(same in a few other places)

>   - `status.infrastructureReady` has beed replaced by `status.initialization.infrastructureProvisioned`
>   - `status.bootstrapReady` has beed replaced by `status.initialization.bootstrapDataSecretCreated`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `status.infrastructureReady` has been replaced by `status.initialization.infrastructureProvisioned`
  - `status.bootstrapReady` has been replaced by `status.initialization.bootstrapDataSecretCreated`
```

- Support for terminal errors has been dropped (see [dataSecretCreated](#cluster-api-contract-changes)).
  - `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` will continue to exist temporarily under `status.deprecated.v1beta1`.
  - The const values for `Failed` phase has been deprecated in the enum type for `machine.status.phase` (controllers are not setting this value anymore)

### ClusterClass

> - See changes that applies to [all kind](#all-kind)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- See changes that apply to [all kind](#all-kind)
```
(also a few more occurences)

- The `definitionFrom` field (deprecated since CAPI v1.8) has been removed from
  - `cluster.spec.topology.variables`
  - `cluster.spec.topology.controlPlane.variables.override`
  - `cluster.spec.topology.workers[].machineDeployments.variables.override`

> - The `builtin.Cluster.Network.IPFamily` variable has been removed and it cannot be used anymore in patches

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `builtin.cluster.Network.ipFamily` variable has been removed and it cannot be used anymore in patches
```
That's the path under which it was consumed

- Support for terminal errors has been dropped (see [dataSecretCreated](#cluster-api-contract-changes)).
  - `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` will continue to exist temporarily under `status.deprecated.v1beta1`.

### KubeadmControlPlane

- KubeadmControlPlane (and the entire KCP provider) now implements the v1beta2 Cluster API contract (see [dataSecretCreated](#cluster-api-contract-changes)).
- See changes that applies to [all kind](#all-kind)
- Replica counters are now consistent with replica counters from other resources (see [dataSecretCreated](#cluster-api-contract-changes)).
  - `status.readyReplicas` has now a new semantic based on machine's `Ready` condition
  - `status.availableReplicas` has now a new semantic based on machine's `Available` condition
  - `status.upToDateReplicas` has now a new semantic (and name) based on machine's `UpToDate` condition
  - Temporarily, old replica counters will still be available under the `status.deprecated.v1beta1` struct
- Informations about the initial provisioning process are now surfacing under `status.initialization` (see [dataSecretCreated](#cluster-api-contract-changes)).

>   - `status.ready` has beed dropped
>   - `status.initialized` has beed replaced by `status.initialization.controlPlaneInitialized`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `status.ready` has been dropped
  - `status.initialized` has been replaced by `status.initialization.controlPlaneInitialized`
```

- Support for terminal errors has been dropped (see [dataSecretCreated](#cluster-api-contract-changes)).
  - `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` will continue to exist temporarily under `status.deprecated.v1beta1`.
  
## Cluster API Contract changes

- v1beta1 version of the Cluster API contract is now deprecated
  - In order to ease the transition to the new v1beta2 version of the Cluster API contract, v1beta2 version 
    will implement temporarily compatibility with the deprecated v1beta1 version of the Cluster API contract   
    - Compatibility, is only intended to ease the transition for providers, and it has some limitations; please

>       read details in following paragraphs:
>      -  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      read details in following paragraphs.
```

  - Compatibility support for the v1beta1 version of the Cluster API contract will be removed tentatively in August 2026 
  - After compatibility support for the v1beta1 version of the Cluster API contract is removed, providers 
    which are implementing the v1beta1 contract will stop to work (they will work only with older versions of Cluster API).

>   

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
(IIRC empty lines are not good for list rendering)

- [InfraCluster: terminal failures](../contracts/infra-cluster.md#infracluster-terminal-failures)
  - The Machine controller won't consider the presence of `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` info
  as "terminal failures"
  - MachineHealthCheck controller won't consider the presence of `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` to
  determine when a Machine needs remediation.

### Contract rules for InfraMachine

Following rules have been changed or are not supported anymore; please read corresponding notes about compatibility
for providers still implementing the v1beta1 contract.

- [InfraMachine: initialization completed](../contracts/infra-machine.md#inframachine-initialization-completed)
- [InfraMachine: conditions](../contracts/infra-machine.md#inframachine-conditions)
  - The fact that Providers are not required to implement conditions remains valid
  - In case a provider implements conditions, Cluster API doesn't require anymore usage of a specific condition type,
    even if transition to `metav1.Conditions` is highly recommended.
- [InfraMachine: terminal failures](../contracts/infra-machine.md#inframachine-terminal-failures)

>   - The Machine controller won't consider the presence of `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` info

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The Cluster controller won't consider the presence of `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` info
```
IIRC. The cluster controller used that in the past, right?

  as "terminal failures"

>   - MachineHealthCheck controller won't consider the presence of `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
MHC does not care about InfraCluster

  - `ExtensionConfig` v1beta2 has created (thus aligning with other Cluster API resources)

 ### All CRDs

- The transition to the new K8s aligned conditions using `metav1.Conditions` types and the new condition semantic
  has been completed for all Kinds:
  - `status.conditions` has been replaced with `status.v1beta2.conditions` based on metav1 condition types
  - the old `status.conditions` based on custom cluster API condition types will continue to exist temporarily 
    under `status.deprecated.v1beta1.conditions` for the sake of down conversions and to provide a temporary option
    for users willing to continue using old conditions.

### Cluster

- See changes that apply to [all CRDs](#all-crds)
- The `spec.topology.class` field has been renamed to `spec.topology.classRef.name`
- The `spec.topology.classNamespace` field has been renamed to `spec.topology.classRef.namespace`
- The `definitionFrom` field (deprecated since CAPI v1.8) has been removed from
  - `spec.topology.variables`
  - `spec.topology.controlPlane.variables.overrides`
  - `spec.topology.workers[].machineDeployments.variables.overrides`
  - `spec.topology.workers[].machinePools.variables.overrides`

> - Informations about the initial provisioning process are now surfacing under the new `status.initialization` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Information about the initial provisioning process are now surfacing under the new `status.initialization` field.
```

 
### MachineSet

- See changes that apply to [all CRDs](#all-crds)
- Replica counters fields are now consistent with replica counters from other resources
  - `status.readyReplicas` has now a new semantic based on machine's `Ready` condition
  - `status.availableReplicas` has now a new semantic based on machine's `Available` condition
  - `status.upToDateReplicas` has now a new semantic (and name) based on machine's `UpToDate` condition
  - Temporarily, old replica counters will still be available under the `status.deprecated.v1beta1` struct
- Support for terminal errors has been dropped.
  - `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` will continue to exist temporarily under `status.deprecated.v1beta1`.

### MachinePool

- See changes that apply to [all CRDs](#all-crds)
- Support for terminal errors has been dropped.
  - `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` will continue to exist temporarily under `status.deprecated.v1beta1`.
  - The const values for `Failed` phase has been deprecated in the enum type for `status.phase` (controllers are not setting this value anymore)

### Machine

- See changes that apply to [all CRDs](#all-crds)

> - Information about the initial provisioning process is now surfacing under the new `status.initialization`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Information about the initial provisioning process is now surfacing under the new `status.initialization` field.
```

  - `status.infrastructureReady` has been replaced by `status.initialization.infrastructureProvisioned`
  - `status.bootstrapReady` has been replaced by `status.initialization.bootstrapDataSecretCreated`
- Support for terminal errors has been dropped.
  - `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` will continue to exist temporarily under `status.deprecated.v1beta1`.
  - The const values for `Failed` phase has been deprecated in the enum type for `status.phase` (controllers are not setting this value anymore)

### ClusterClass

- See changes that apply to [all CRDs](#all-crds)

> - The `builtin.cluster.classRef.Name` and `builtin.cluster.classRef.Namespace` variables has been added

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `builtin.cluster.classRef.Name` and `builtin.cluster.classRef.Namespace` variables have been added
```

  - `status.readyReplicas` has now a new semantic based on machine's `Ready` condition
  - `status.availableReplicas` has now a new semantic based on machine's `Available` condition
  - `status.upToDateReplicas` has now a new semantic (and name) based on machine's `UpToDate` condition
  - Temporarily, old replica counters will still be available under the `status.deprecated.v1beta1` struct
- Information about the initial provisioning process is now surfacing under the new `status.initialization` field.
  - `status.ready` has been dropped
  - `status.initialized` has been replaced by `status.initialization.controlPlaneInitialized`
- Support for terminal errors has been dropped.
  - `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` will continue to exist temporarily under `status.deprecated.v1beta1`.
  
## Cluster API Contract changes

- v1beta1 version of the Cluster API contract is now deprecated
  - In order to ease the transition to the new v1beta2 version of the Cluster API contract, v1beta2 version 
    will implement temporarily compatibility with the deprecated v1beta1 version of the Cluster API contract   

>     - Compatibility, is only intended to ease the transition for providers, and it has some limitations; please

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Compatibility is only intended to ease the transition for providers and it has some limitations; please
```

    * [How to implement the new v1beta2 contract](#how-to-implement-the-new-v1beta2-contract)
    * [How to bump to CAPI V1.11 but keep using deprecated v1beta1 conditions](#how-to-bump-to-capi-v111-but-keep-using-deprecated-v1beta1-conditions)
    * [How to start using metav1.conditions](#how-to-start-using-metav1conditions)
      * [Stage 1](#stage-1-)
      * [Stage 2](#stage-2)
      * [Stage 3](#stage-3)
<!-- TOC -->

## Go version

- The minimal Go version required to build Cluster API is v1.24.x
- The Go version used by Cluster API is v1.24.x

## Dependencies

- The Controller Runtime version used by Cluster API is v0.21.x
- The version of the Kubernetes libraries used by Cluster API is v1.33.x

## API Changes

- v1beta1 API version is now deprecated and it will be removed tentatively in August 2026
- v1beta2 API version has been introduced; see following paragraphs for more details
- If you are using the `runtime.cluster.x-k8s.io` API group, please be aware that
  - `ExtensionConfig` v1alpha1 has been deprecated, and it will be removed in a following release.

>   - `ExtensionConfig` v1beta2 been has created (thus aligning with other Cluster API resources)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `ExtensionConfig` v1beta2 has been created (thus aligning with other Cluster API resources)
```

 ### All CRDs

- The transition to the new K8s aligned conditions using `metav1.Conditions` types and the new condition semantic
  has been completed for all Kinds:
  - `status.conditions` has been replaced with `status.v1beta2.conditions` based on metav1 condition types
  - the old `status.conditions` based on custom cluster API condition types will continue to exist temporarily 
    under `status.deprecated.v1beta1.conditions` for the sake of down conversions and to provide a temporary option
    for users willing to continue using old conditions.

### Cluster

- See changes that apply to [all CRDs](#all-crds)
- The `spec.topology.class` field has been renamed to `spec.topology.classRef.name`
- The `spec.topology.classNamespace` field has been renamed to `spec.topology.classRef.namespace`
- The `definitionFrom` field (deprecated since CAPI v1.8) has been removed from
  - `spec.topology.variables`
  - `spec.topology.controlPlane.variables.overrides`

>   - `spec.topology.workers[].machineDeployments.variables.overrides`

Reviewer 2: missed before. There are a few cases where the array is on the wrong level (machineDeployments is the array not workers)

  - The const values for `Failed` phase has been deprecated in the enum type for `status.phase` (controllers are not setting this value anymore)

### Machine

- See changes that apply to [all CRDs](#all-crds)
- Information about the initial provisioning process is now surfacing under the new `status.initialization` field.
  - `status.infrastructureReady` has been replaced by `status.initialization.infrastructureProvisioned`
  - `status.bootstrapReady` has been replaced by `status.initialization.bootstrapDataSecretCreated`
- Support for terminal errors has been dropped.
  - `status.failureReason` and `status.failureMessage` will continue to exist temporarily under `status.deprecated.v1beta1`.
  - The const values for `Failed` phase has been deprecated in the enum type for `status.phase` (controllers are not setting this value anymore)

### MachineHealthCheck

- See changes that apply to [all CRDs](#all-crds)
- The `spec.unhealthyConditions` field has been renamed to `spec.unhealthyNodeConditions`

### ClusterClass

- See changes that apply to [all CRDs](#all-crds)

> - The `unhealthyConditions` field has been renamed to `spec.unhealthyNodeConditions` in following struct:
>   - `spec.controlPlane`
>   - `spec.workers[].machineDeployments`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `unhealthyConditions` field has been renamed to `unhealthyNodeConditions` in following struct:
  - `spec.controlPlane.machineHealthCheck`
  - `spec.workers.machineDeployments[].machineHealthCheck`
```

  - `MachinePoolPhase`, used in `machinePool.status.phase`
  - `MachinePhase`, used in `machine.status.phase`
  
## Removals scheduled for future releases

> As documented in [Suggested changes for providers](#suggested-changes-for-providers), it is highly reccommanded to start planning for future removals:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As documented in [Suggested changes for providers](#suggested-changes-for-providers), it is highly recommended to start planning for future removals:
```

  the `util/deprecated/v1beta1` package, the code handling old conditions in `util/patch.Helper`
  and everything related to the custom Cluster API custom condition type.
- Compatibility support for the v1beta1 version of the Cluster API contract will be removed tentatively in August 2026

## Suggested changes for providers

- We highly recommend providers to start using Cluster API v1beta2 types when bumping to CAPI v1.11. 
  This requires changing following import:

  ```go
  import (
      ...
      clusterv1 "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/api/v1beta1"
  )
  ```
  
  into:
  
  ```go
  import (
      ...
      clusterv1 "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/api/v1beta2"
  )
  ```

  Please refer to [API Changes](#api-changes) for more details about the changes introduced by this release.

  Note: it is technically possible for providers to keep using v1beta1 types from CAPI v1.11, but this is 
  not recommanded (this approach was not tested during the implementation, we don't know if there are road blockers). 

- If providers are using Conditions from Cluster API resources, we highly recommend providers to use new 

>   conditions instead of old ones. Utils for working with new conditions ara available in the `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/conditions`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  conditions instead of old ones. Utils for working with new conditions ara available in the `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/conditions` package.
```

  - `MachinePoolPhase`, used in `machinePool.status.phase`
  - `MachinePhase`, used in `machine.status.phase`
  
## Removals

> There are no removals in the CAPI v1.11 version.

Reviewer 2: I think this is not correct anymore given all the removals we mentioned above. I think I would just integrate what we have in this section into the API changes section above

Author: changes the paragraph scope a little, PTAL

> However, as documented in [Suggested changes for providers](#suggested-changes-for-providers), it is highly reccomanded to start planning for future removals:

Reviewer 2: reccomanded typo

(more cases below)

- v1beta1 API version will be removed tentatively in August 2026
- Starting from the CAPI release when v1beta1 removal will happen (tentative Aug 2026), the Cluster API project
  will remove the Cluster API condition type, the `util/conditions/deprecated/v1beta1` package, 

>   the `util/deprecated/v1beta1` package package, the code handling conditions in `util/patch.Helper`

Reviewer 2: 2x package

> the code handling conditions in `util/patch.Helper`

only the old conditions, right?

Author: yes, fixed everywhere

  and everything related to the custom Cluster API custom condition type.
- Compatibility support for the v1beta1 version of the Cluster API contract will be removed tentatively in August 2026

## Suggested changes for providers

> - We highly recommend providers to start using to Cluster API v1beta2 types when bumping to CAPI v1.11. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We highly recommend providers to start using Cluster API v1beta2 types when bumping to CAPI v1.11. 
```

  This requires changing following import:

  ```go
  import (
      ...
      clusterv1 "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/api/v1beta1"
  )
  ```
  
  into:
  
  ```go
  import (
      ...
      clusterv1 "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/api/v1beta2"
  )
  ```

  Please refer to [API Changes](#api-changes) for more details about the changes introduced by this release.

  Note: it is technically possible for providers to keep using v1beta1 types from CAPI v1.11, but this is 
  not recommanded (this approach was not tested during the implementation, we don't know if there are road blockers). 

> - If providers are using Conditions from Cluster API resources, we highly recommend providers to check new 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If providers are using Conditions from Cluster API resources, we highly recommend providers to use new 
```

> - If providers are using Conditions from Cluster API resources, we highly recommend providers to check new 

Reviewer 2: Can we dedup with the section below? (l.330+)

Author: The two sentences are about two different problems.

This sentence is about which condition you user e.g. when looking at the Cluster object
The paragraphs below is about what you do for conditions on provider's own resources

I tried to clarify, PTAL

>   conditions instad of old ones. Utils for working with new conditions ara available in the `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/conditions`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  conditions instead of old ones. Utils for working with new conditions ara available in the `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/conditions` package.
```

- We highly recommend providers to start planning the move to the new v1beta2 version of the Cluster API contract;
  the transition MUST be completed before compatibility support for the v1beta1 version of the Cluster API 
  contract will be removed tentatively in August 2026

> - Depending on which option you are choosing for the Cluster API contract your are going to implement, please refer to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Depending on which Cluster API contract version you are choosing to implement, please refer to:
```

  * [How to bump to CAPI V1.11 but keep implementing the deprecated v1beta1 contract](#how-to-bump-to-capi-v111-but-keep-implementing-the-deprecated-v1beta1-contract)
  * [How to implement the new v1beta2 contract](#how-to-implement-the-new-v1beta2-contract)
  
- We highly recommend providers to define their future strategy for condition management; also in this case the 
  transition to the new condition management strategy MUST be completed before compatibility support for the v1beta1
  version of the Cluster API contract will be removed tentatively in August 2026
  Available options are:
  - Migrate to `metav1.Conditions` like Cluster API (recommended)
  - Replace Cluster API's v1beta1 Conditions with a custom condition implementation that is compliant with
    what is required by the v1beta2 Cluster API contract.  
    - Starting from the CAPI release when v1beta1 removal will happen (tentative August 2026), the Cluster API project

>       will remove the Cluster API condition type, the `util/conditions/deprecated/v1beta1` package, the `util/deprecated/v1beta1` package,

Reviewer 2: Please check for the findings in the similar sentence above

Reviewer 2: Mostly just that there is a similar sentence in a few places and I added 1-2 comments at one of these occurences.

I'll check/compare during the next review

- v1beta1 API version will be removed tentatively in August 2026
- Starting from the CAPI release when v1beta1 removal will happen (tentative Aug 2026), the Cluster API project
  will remove the Cluster API condition type, the `util/conditions/deprecated/v1beta1` package, 
  the `util/deprecated/v1beta1` package, the code handling old conditions in `util/patch.Helper`
  and everything related to the custom Cluster API custom condition type.
- Compatibility support for the v1beta1 version of the Cluster API contract will be removed tentatively in August 2026

## Suggested changes for providers

- We highly recommend providers to start using Cluster API v1beta2 types when bumping to CAPI v1.11. 
  This requires changing following import:

  ```go
  import (
      ...
      clusterv1 "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/api/v1beta1"
  )
  ```
  
  into:
  
  ```go
  import (
      ...
      clusterv1 "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/api/v1beta2"
  )
  ```

  Please refer to [API Changes](#api-changes) for more details about the changes introduced by this release.

  Note: it is technically possible for providers to keep using v1beta1 types from CAPI v1.11, but this is 

>   not recommanded (this approach was not tested during the implementation, we don't know if there are road blockers). 

Reviewer 2: recommanded (sorry missed before)

Important!
All packages from the import above (all packages below `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/deprecated/v1beta1`) are going
to be removed from CAPI when the v1beta1 removal will happen (tentative Aug 2026).

#### Stage 2

Create a new API version, swap old conditions and new conditions, implement conversions
- Move old conditions from `status.conditions` to `status.deprecated.v1beta1.conditions`
- Move new conditions from `status.v1beta2.conditions` to `status.conditions`

If you are at this stage, you must use following util packages from CAPI v1.11 (or following releases, see note below):

```go
import (
	...
    "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/conditions"
    v1beta1conditions "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/conditions/deprecated/v1beta1"
    "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/patch"
)
```

- the `conditions` package provides access to utils for managing `metav1.Conditions` in `status.conditions`
- the `v1beta1conditions` package alias provides access to utils for managing `clusterv1beta2.Conditions` in `status.deprecated.v1beta1.conditions`
- the `patch` package provides access to utils for patching objects in this phase

Important!

> All package below `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/deprecated/` are going to be removed from CAPI when the

Reviewer 2: I think you might want to update this one a bit. Currently it's stating all packages below util/deprecated will be removed.
1. if we aim for this path let's use deprecated/v1beta1
2. the import used in this example is not below util/deprecated

Author: Fixed, PTAL

Important!
All packages from the import above (all packages below `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/deprecated/v1beta1`) are going
to be removed from CAPI when the v1beta1 removal will happen (tentative Aug 2026).

#### Stage 2

Create a new API version, swap old conditions and new conditions, implement conversions
- Move old conditions from `status.conditions` to `status.deprecated.v1beta1.conditions`
- Move new conditions from `status.v1beta2.conditions` to `status.conditions`

If you are at this stage, you must use following util packages from CAPI v1.11 (or following releases, see note below):

```go
import (
	...
    "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/conditions"
    v1beta1conditions "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/conditions/deprecated/v1beta1"
    "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/patch"
)
```

- the `conditions` package provides access to utils for managing `metav1.Conditions` in `status.conditions`
- the `v1beta1conditions` package alias provides access to utils for managing `clusterv1beta2.Conditions` in `status.deprecated.v1beta1.conditions`
- the `patch` package provides access to utils for patching objects in this phase

Important!

> The "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/conditions/deprecated/v1beta1" is going to be removed from CAPI when the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The package `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/conditions/deprecated/v1beta1` is going to be removed from CAPI when the
```

After compatibility support for the v1beta1 version of the Cluster API contract will be removed, providers
which are still implementing the v1beta1 contract will stop to work (they will work only with older versions of Cluster API).

Please see [Cluster API Contract changes](#cluster-api-contract-changes) and [provider contracts](../contracts/overview.md) for more details.

### How to implement the new v1beta2 contract

We highly recommend providers to start planning the move to the new v1beta2 version of the Cluster API contract as soon
as possible.

Implementing the new v1beta2 contract for providers is a two step operation:
1. Implement changes defined for a specific provider type; See [Cluster API Contract changes](#cluster-api-contract-changes) and [provider contracts](../contracts/overview.md) for more details.
  - In most cases, v1beta2 contract introduced changes in the `initialization completed`, `conditions`, `terminal failures` rules;
    Also `replicas` rule is changed for control plane providers.

> 2. While implementing the , It is also highly recommended to check the implementation of all the other rules

Reviewer 2: word missing after "While implementing the"

   (documentation for contract rules have been improved in recent releases, worth to take a look!).
3. Change the CRD annotation that document which Cluster API contract is implemented by your Provider. e.g.

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  annotations:
    cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta2: <your API version>
  name: <your CRD name>
```

### How to bump to CAPI V1.11 but keep using deprecated v1beta1 conditions

A provider can continue to use deprecated v1beta1 conditions also after bumping to CAPI V1.11, but to do

> it is require to change following imports:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
so it is required to change following imports:
```

> ```go

Reviewer: Does it work correctly ?
It looks like that syntax highlight is broken.

Author: It doesn't seems bad to me
<img width="932" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f7a8f154-bcab-4183-ada5-d5a4ffbb69cd" />

import (
	...
    "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/conditions"
    "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/patch"
)
```

into:

```go
import (
	...
    conditions "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/deprecated/v1beta1/conditions"
    patch "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/deprecated/v1beta1/patch"
)
```

Also, please note that starting from the CAPI release when v1beta1 removal will happen (tentative Aug 2026), the Cluster API project

> will remove the Cluster API condition type, the `util/conditions/deprecated/v1beta1` package, the `util/deprecated/v1beta1` package,

Reviewer 2: please check for findings above on similar sentences

Reviewer 2: kk. I'll check

the code handling conditions in `util/patch.Helper` and everything related to the custom Cluster API custom condition type.

See [Suggested changes for providers](#suggested-changes-for-providers) for more details.

### How to start using metav1.conditions

If providers choose to migrate `metav1.Conditions`, the process described in [Improving status in CAPI resources](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/4a2e16a3d71d99a923b1f7f3a3efe03c299665fb/docs/proposals/20240916-improve-status-in-CAPI-resources.md)
can be used as a reference about how to implement a phased transition.

> As a quick summary, transition should go trough following phases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a quick summary, transition should go through following phases:
```

#### Stage 1 

Add `status.v1beta2.conditions` to your API (existing conditions will remain at `status.conditions`)

If you are at this stage, you must use following util packages from CAPI v1.11 (or following releases, see note below):

```go
import (
	...
    conditions "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/deprecated/v1beta1/conditions"
    v1beta2conditions "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/deprecated/v1beta1/conditions/v1beta2"
    patch "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/deprecated/v1beta1/patch"
)
```

- the `conditions` package alias provides access to utils for managing `clusterv1beta1.Conditions` in `status.conditions`
- the `v1beta2conditions` package alias provides access to utils for managing `metav1.Conditions` in `status.v1beta2.conditions`

> - the `patch` package alias provides access to utils for patching object in this phase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the `patch` package alias provides access to utils for patching objects in this phase.
```

Important! 
All package below `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/deprecated/` are going to be removed from CAPI when the 
v1beta1 removal will happen (tentative Aug 2026).

#### Stage 2

Create a new API version, swap old conditions and new conditions, implement conversions
- Move old conditions from `status.conditions` to `status.deprecated.v1beta1.conditions`
- Move new conditions from `status.v1beta2.conditions` to `status.conditions`

If you are at this stage, you must use following util packages from CAPI v1.11 (or following releases, see note below):

```go
import (
	...
    "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/conditions"
    v1beta1conditions "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/conditions/deprecated/v1beta1"
    "sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/patch"
)
```

- the `conditions` package provides access to utils for managing `metav1.Conditions` in `status.conditions`

> - the `v1beta1conditions` package alias provides access to utils for managing `clusterv1beta1.Conditions` in `status.deprecated.v1beta1.conditions`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the `v1beta1conditions` package alias provides access to utils for managing `clusterv1beta2.Conditions` in `status.deprecated.v1beta1.conditions`
```
I don't know what's less confusing. But technically this is v1beta2.Conditions

- the `patch` package provides access to utils for patching object in this phase

Important!

> All package below `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/deprecated/` are going to be removed from CAPI when the

Author: I'm referring to all the packages used in the import above, I tried to clarify, PTAL
